Okay, good morning and welcome to 7:27
QuickTime in the Enterprise.
This is going to be a really good session
because we have two great speakers,
one from the
American Electric Power Company and
another gentleman from
the University of Wisconsin who
are really using QuickTime in
a very large-scale deployment.
The guys from American Electric Power are
doing a lot of webcasting and have
built a lot of custom applications
to deploy QuickTime streaming services
in their corporate environment.
And the University of Wisconsin has
actually converted their cable TV system
to XServe and QuickTime streaming.
So you guys are going to get
a very good idea as to how you
can deploy QuickTime in a more
enterprise-like environment.
So without further ado,
I'd like to introduce Nate Caplin
from American Electric Power who's
going to kick things off for us.
Nate Caplin, Thank you, Stephen.
Hello, everyone.
I'm Nate Caplin,
streaming media manager at
American Electric Power in Columbus,
Ohio.
The focus of my presentation will
be on how we've used QuickTime for
corporate communications,
both internally and externally.
I'll cover some background about
how streaming media evolved at AEP,
followed by some case
studies and opinions.
Some of the issues around using
QuickTime in the Enterprise include
corporate IT departments' common
distrust of non-Microsoft solutions,
deploying QuickTime Player to
thousands of PCs,
video asset management,
how to leverage live webcasting,
and optimizing production workflow.
There are also many opportunities
for Apple and its developers,
I think, to improve QuickTime to
make it more attractive to
Enterprise customers like ourselves,
and I'll address several of those.
I hope you'll take away from this
presentation a lot of useful info,
including some benefits of using
QuickTime versus Windows Media that
you can use if you're trying to
convince a corporate IT department
or university to do so,
strategies for distributing
QuickTime Player as painlessly
as possible in the Enterprise,
ideas for building a repository
of QuickTime content,
best practices for a webcasting studio,
how live webcasts can be an
effective communication medium
for employees or students,
and what opportunities exist for
developers to make products that would
sell better to Enterprise customers.
Here are some of the products
that I plan to cover.
In addition,
I'll be touching on third-party live
webcasting apps like Live Channel,
Wirecast, and Cleaner Live.
I'll also focus a good
deal of time on AEPTV,
which is a custom video portal we
designed to manage our QuickTime content.
So before I dive into the
details on how we use QuickTime,
let me tell you a little
bit about who we are.
American Electric Power is
a utility based in Columbus,
Ohio.
We are the largest power
generator in the U.S.
with 5 million customers and
11 state service territory.
We have over 20,000 employees working
in almost 500 different work locations,
which begins to explain why internal
communications is a big challenge for us.
We've had a corporate video
department for almost 20 years,
and we've been using streaming
media for over five years.
I'd like to show you a quick video now
to demonstrate some of the work we do
and to tell you a little more about AEP.
It's just a little under two minutes.
AEP has been through some very
dramatic changes in the past few years.
Industry restructuring, competition,
the California energy crisis,
and the new wholesale energy markets have
changed the face of the energy business.
AEP is not the same company
we were only a few years ago.
We're still one of the largest,
lowest cost,
and most reliable electricity providers.
But we've also become a leading
wholesale energy company.
AEP operates more than 80 power plants
with a capacity of 38,000 megawatts,
making us America's
largest power generator.
This power is generated from coal, gas,
nuclear, hydro, and wind,
assuring a balanced mix of fuel sources.
AEP also operates one of the
largest power systems in the world,
with a world-class transmission
and distribution system
stretching through 11 states.
This system serves more
than 4.5 million customers,
providing reliable energy at a
cost below the national average.
A few years ago,
who could have predicted AEP would
become one of the top wholesale
energy companies in the country?
Right now, we're number two,
and on our way to becoming number one.
And with our combination of strong
regulated and unregulated businesses,
AEP is clearly poised
for long-term growth.
This isn't... I'm going to
get out of this right now.
I think you've seen enough.
That's our CEO.
If we can go back to slides, please.
The interactive media group that
I work in has about 16 people,
and we're responsible for
the company's websites,
both internal and external,
all of its print materials,
as well as over 200
video projects per year.
From training and safety videos,
to ethics, legal,
and environmental compliance,
to live town hall webcasts.
Which brings me to why we use QuickTime.
First and foremost,
QuickTime is the glue that ties
together our entire production workflow,
from acquisition to editing to delivery.
Aside from the obvious
use of QuickTime in our
video production workflow,
other Apple technologies have influenced
our decision to use QuickTime,
especially the server platform.
We found XServe and XServe
RAID to be superior in
functionality to our PC servers,
both as departmental file server or as
an enterprise streaming media server.
They cost less,
especially when you consider the cost of
Windows 2003 enterprise server licenses.
They're easier to set up and manage,
and aren't as expensive as the
Windows 2003 enterprise server licenses.
They're also less susceptible to
virus and security intrusions,
which are all good selling points
for our corporate IT folks.
QuickTime Player is a simple,
elegant player with advanced
features like instant on streaming
that Windows Media lacks,
at least Windows Media players
that work on our large installed
base of Windows NT computers.
That last point is really important.
We've used Windows Media also for years,
and one of its worst problems is
the tangle of different versions
of Windows Media players required
for different versions of Windows.
That fact has held us back from
using most of the newer features
of Windows Media Player 9,
because it requires Windows 2000.
It won't work on Windows 98, for example.
It also requires Windows 2003 server,
which our corporate IT department has not
yet qualified for use in our enterprise.
So now that you understand who we are
and why we decided to use QuickTime,
I'm going to start by explaining some of
what we had to do to deploy QuickTime.
The first step is obviously
distributing the QuickTime player.
That may sound simple,
but there are several challenges
unique in a corporate IT environment.
First, we had to obtain a site license,
which allows us to distribute
QuickTime player to our own users,
because our IT security
department doesn't want users
downloading and installing
software on their own machines.
Many of them don't even have
access to the public internet.
Next, our IT lab installed and tested
QuickTime Player on all of our
existing Windows platforms,
which took several weeks.
In the process,
they determined the default
settings they wanted,
including turning off features like
auto-update and the Hot Pics movie.
The next step normally would be to
update disk images for new PC installs,
but unfortunately we haven't
gotten that far yet at AEP.
Doing so is a very costly
and political process that
involves Dell Computer as well.
So instead, we've built a custom
installer using LANDESK,
a management tool that
our help desk people use.
It allows us to push QuickTime out to a
user's PC without having them go through
all the prompts that are part of the
normal QuickTime installation process,
and it sets the preferences that we want.
Then, as part of our video portal site,
which I'll talk about in a minute,
we use BrowserHawk,
a server-side utility for
detecting users' configurations,
to detect whether a user has the
right version of QuickTime installed.
The next step is to use
the QuickTime installer to
install QuickTime on your PC.
This is a very simple
and practical process.
The user can use the QuickTime installer
to install QuickTime on their PC,
and then use the QuickTime installer
to install QuickTime on their PC.
And if they don't,
prompt them to install it.
Finally,
we've begun to promote QuickTime by
making certain content available
in enhanced versions in
QuickTime only or QuickTime first.
As I'll talk about later,
over the next several months,
we'll be deploying the next
version of our AEP TV interface,
which, among other things,
goes to a single launch button
that allows us to determine
what format to give people.
That brings me to AEP TV,
our video portal for employees.
A subset of our AEP Now intranet,
AEP TV is a combination web-based
video library and live webcasting
portal where employees can browse a
continuously updated library of over 200
videos by category or search by keyword.
That brings us to the demo.
I'll be doing this
over the corporate VPN,
so let's pray to the demo
gods that this all works.
I'm going to start in
our corporate intranet,
AEPnow.
This is basically a central portal,
the default home page
of all AEP employees.
It's basically a news site updated
with company news as well as links
to other common tasks like time
reporting and expense reporting
and HR and all of that good stuff.
AEPTV is integrated into the
AEPnow portal in a few ways.
There are promotions here to
current content that we're doing
as well as a link under the tools
and resources or useful sites.
I forget where they put it.
But also any news story
that has a related video
has a video icon next to it.
When you go to that news story,
there's a sidebar for AEPTV that
highlights any related videos
and it can do one or more.
So for example, if I click this link,
it's going to pop up the
AEPTV interface and take you right
to the chooser page for that video.
The chooser page contains a
full description of the video,
title, duration,
as well as a choice of formats and sizes.
We started out with this
site almost two years ago,
and Windows Media is the kind
of top-level default choice,
but we've added QuickTime to it
and plan to switch exclusively to
QuickTime over the rest of this year.
If you click small QuickTime,
for example,
it pops up a small playback window,
and demo God's willing, it should play.
Looks like they're not.
Let's try the other one.
that's too bad.
It's not going to play.
But I'll take you through
the rest of the interface.
If you go to the home page,
there's areas for three features, first,
secondary and third feature
where we promote current content
as well as upcoming webcasts.
There's pull down menus at the
top for the video library which
are broken out by category.
And so for example,
we can go into new commercials,
into the safety ads and see if by
any chance another video might play.
It is.
My dad's so smart.
He can fix anything.
He can fix leasing, my bike, anything.
He's the best.
My dad knows how to be
safe around electricity,
too.
So, you get the idea there.
There's also an A to Z index,
which lists all the videos
currently visible on the site.
And there's a search function.
So, for example, if I type in, oh,
how about chainsaw?
Chainsaw safety.
Chainsaw safety video.
There's also a feature to sign up where
users can give us their email address
and we'll notify them about new videos.
There is a help section, of course.
Feedback allows people to
give us their opinion about
what they've seen on the site.
This would be for general feedback, but,
for example,
if you are on a particular video,
And you click the feedback button.
The feedback is specific to that video,
and it comes to us by email,
and it gets logged in a database.
Live webcasts are kept in here,
so you can see a list of
upcoming live webcasts.
If you go to a live webcast page,
since this webcast is not scheduled
to actually start until July 21st,
of course you can't click on the
formats to launch up the videos yet,
but you can submit a question right now.
And these questions get submitted to
a web-based administration form that
our folks can monitor while they're
actually doing the live webcast.
So quickly I want to show
you the back end of this.
We have a website called AAPTVadmin.com.
Which has as part of it,
the main section is the clip archive.
And this is where we can see all
of the videos that are actually
entered into the site at the moment.
It takes a moment to load
because there are so many now.
There we go.
As you can see, there's something like
300-some-odd videos in here,
and we have little boxes that explain,
you know,
which formats they're available in,
and the red and the green means
whether they're actually visible
in the menuing interface right now.
So we can post a video to the site,
which isn't yet visible
to every employee.
As an example,
it can be a for-approval version.
Then we can send a simple URL link
that will call it up in the interface.
It's also a way to post a video
that's only supposed to be seen
by a small group of employees
who will get a link via email.
All right.
If we can go back to slides, please.
All right,
so that's AAP TV as it is today.
We've begun working on version 2.0.
Some of the new features
include a single launch button,
that there, instead of the chooser
page that you saw before.
Using BrowserHawk will determine what
connection speed the user can sustain and
feed them the largest version possible.
This will allow us to decide if
and when to push QuickTime Player,
which could be by way of posting
a popular video in the future.
In QuickTime format only,
because that would force this to
default to QuickTime and force people
to install it to watch the video.
Other new features include the
ability for users to download
the video file to their PC.
If you look at these links on the bottom,
there's a download video button
that would actually download the
QuickTime file to their desktop.
We've had a lot of requests for
this lately because people want to
present a larger version of the video
than their connection speed would
prevent them to watch in real time,
and they want to do it maybe when
they're not connected to the network
in front of a group of people,
like a presentation like this.
The other option is to email a video,
which we're going to be adding.
It'll actually just email a link with
their comments to friends or coworkers.
So that's AAP TV.
What about our QuickTime workflow?
Quite simply,
QuickTime and increasingly other
Apple products touch every part of it.
Our four producer editors
shoot everything on Sony DVCam.
Each one of them has a
PowerBook and a dedicated video
edit suite with a PowerMac G5.
Video capture is always by FireWire into
either Final Cut Pro or Avid Express Pro.
While all of them can use Final Cut,
two of them are still more
comfortable with the Avid interface,
and so that's what they use.
Recently, all of them have begun using
SoundTrack and LiveType,
even the Avid guys, in addition to
After Effects and Pro Tools.
And they're all very
excited about motion,
so we're looking forward to that, guys.
Once videos are edited,
a QuickTime DV master file is
exported and saved on our XServe RAID.
We also make and store a
DV tape in our library,
but having the master files
always online makes encoding
and reuse much easier later on.
I then encode the video files
using Cleaner into versions that
are more appropriate for the web.
The encoded files are then copied up
to our two QuickTime streaming servers,
and AAPTV admin is
updated to add the clip.
People watch the video,
and when they request DVD copies,
we use DVD Studio Pro to make
a master disc and a duplicator
to burn and print copies.
And we fill those requests every Monday.
All right, webcasting studio.
Since we produce over 200 videos a year,
having a studio is a no-brainer.
What makes a video studio a webcasting
studio is the addition of some gear
and some attention paid to audience
interaction and visuals that don't
break up badly when they're reduced
in size and compressed for streaming.
You don't necessarily need a big space,
but it needs to be quite well lit,
and it needs to be quiet.
At AEP, we have a broadcast-grade
studio with four cameras,
an isolated control room, audio board,
video switcher, and a TV.
DecoTitler, The Works.
We added the streaming media station
to the control room for live webcasts.
It receives the program video
and audio feeds and converts
those to DV over FireWire,
distributing it to
multiple video encoders.
From there, I can monitor the encoders as
well as remotely monitor the
servers up on the 19th floor.
We also have another booth
connected to the control room for
an audience interaction manager.
This person screens calls to our
on-air phone system and enters
information into that system's
software that the on-air moderator
sees on a laptop that's on the set.
The audience interaction manager also
screens the questions submitted online
from AEPTV using a web-based tool
that links to the questions database.
The on-air moderator
sees that on his laptop,
too.
While we use a Sony broadcast
video switcher in our studio,
a portable switcher like the excellent
DataVideo SE800 is great for doing
a live webcast from the field.
It lets us use up to four
DV camcorders connected to it with
165-foot-long FireWire cables.
And it outputs a mixed program in DV over
FireWire directly to our field encoder,
which is just a laptop running
live encoding software.
For QuickTime live encoding software,
there are a few choices now.
From Apple's free QuickTime 6 Broadcast
to Live Channel Pro and Wirecast,
which both cost under $1,000.
I'll go more into depth into encoding
software in just a little while.
[Transcript missing]
It also saves him and his top lieutenants
considerable time traveling around
to give the same speech over and over
again and answer the same questions.
But, although QuickTime has
served us pretty well so far,
it could do a lot more to appeal to
the needs of Enterprise customers.
For example, QTSS Publisher is a
very neat 1.0 product.
When I first saw it,
I was excited at the prospect of
easily managing our growing library,
but it really needs a better
user interface that doesn't break
down when throwing dozens or
hundreds of files at it at once.
It also needs to be more
flexible in where it allows
media to be stored on the system,
and it could benefit from
reporting capabilities.
For example, wouldn't it be nice if you
could access QTSS logs to show
and chart viewer statistics?
Also, we run two QuickTime streaming
servers in tandem for load balancing,
and we can't find any way to
easily duplicate a QTSS Publisher
library from one server to another.
QuickTime Streaming Server is
much better in Panther Server,
and I applaud Apple for building
a better management tool.
We could really use a true
multi-bitrate solution,
though, that detects users' bandwidth
and switches streams on the fly.
Our BrowserHawk solution is an
imperfect workaround that took
considerable effort to develop.
We would also like to see built-in
support for clustering and failover
with two servers sharing the load,
but with either able to take over
for the other in case of failure,
even during a live webcast.
We love QuickTime Player,
but it was a long,
tough process to get all of our
ducks in a row to distribute it.
Of all the things,
the NAG movie caused a lot of
arguments with our IT folks,
who were afraid that users
would be confused and go out
and purchase QuickTime Pro,
or at least flood the help
desk with questions about
what that pop-up box means.
Also, while we were able to
convince our IT department to
develop a custom installer,
it almost didn't happen.
Apple should have a free, customizable
Enterprise QuickTime installer,
just like Real and Windows Media do.
Compressor is a great new product,
but we still aren't using
it for anything but DVDs,
because it can't do Sorenson
2-pass variable bitrate encoding.
Perhaps this point will
become moot when H.264 ships.
Finally, QuickTime Broadcaster could
really use an update to add
support for multiple streams,
higher quality encoding at larger sizes
that universities and enterprises can
support on their high-speed networks.
A real preview and integration
with Keynote for broadcasting slide
presentations in separate web browser
window or frame next to a live webcast.
It would seem only natural
that Apple could do this.
Lately at least,
Apple has gotten most of the really
important stuff right for the Enterprise.
XServe and XServe RAID are
just beautiful products.
We love them.
They make our IT guys jealous,
which I love.
All I can say is keep up the good work.
Panther Server was a welcome improvement
and has been rock solid for us.
I'm anxious to learn more about what
Tiger Server brings to the table.
XSAN.
Wow.
I've been waiting for this for years.
We've had a fiber channel SAN among
our video edit suites before,
based on ADDO Excelware,
but it never really worked reliably and
we finally had to just throw it out.
I suspect XSAN will sell very well.
I, for one, plan to put in an order
for one next year.
XGrid seems like a great opportunity
for distributed batch video encoding.
I hope Apple, Sorenson,
and Discrete consider
updating Compressor,
Squeeze, and Cleaner to exploit that.
With about 30 modern
Macs in our workgroup,
including three XSERVs and about
half a dozen Power Mac G5s,
maybe my batches can finally
complete in less than a day.
On the topic of H.264,
this is really going to improve
the quality of the experience
we can give to our users,
but it won't matter unless it plays
back on a free Windows version
of the QuickTime player.
I hope Apple does not make the
mistake Microsoft did by trying to
make new features in Windows media
tied to the operating system
in an effort to sell that OS.
If it does, we might have to abandon
QuickTime someday because all
of our viewers are on Windows.
Finally,
I'm really excited to announce that the
new Windows OS is coming to the market.
I'm really excited about
the Squeeze 4 from Sorenson,
which is officially in
beta as of this week.
It's the first all-new third-party
QuickTime encoding solution
for Mac in several years,
and it's exactly what Discrete could
have done with Cleaner if they'd only
listened to users about the interface.
Live encoding is still one Achilles'
heel for QuickTime right now.
We really need a pro
webcasting application.
There are only a few players out
there with any QuickTime live—there
are only a few players out there in
the QuickTime live webcasting market.
I've already talked about
QuickTime Broadcaster.
Then there's Live Channel,
which tries too hard to be a studio
in the box with a busy interface
chock full of stuff I don't need,
because we already have a studio.
And the main problem, though,
is it doesn't do multiple streams.
Wirecast is a new product
from Vera Software that
looks really promising.
It does do multiple live streams,
which is great.
But like QT Broadcaster,
its UI is very basic and it lacks
PowerPoint or Keynote integration.
And although it does do multiple streams,
they're completely independent.
So if you use any of its
video switching features,
you can't synchronize those actions
among the different streams.
CastStream isn't really
an encoder at all,
just a presentation
system for live webcasts.
Regardless, though,
it's not practical for us since it
requires a proprietary player and server
and has expensive licensing fees for
as many simultaneous users as we need.
Other products and services from Verage
and Yahoo Broadcast that try to appeal
to enterprise clients like us are too
ambitious and aggressive in scope and
cost hundreds of thousands of dollars.
Plus, they require extensive
customization once you buy them.
They assume we want to just write
a big check and have someone
else handle the whole production.
That brings us to what we've been
using these last couple years:
Discrete Cleaner Live.
In most respects,
it's the perfect live webcasting app,
but it has a couple of major problems
that limit its future usability for us.
It only does Windows Media and Reel,
and Discrete has discontinued it.
Regardless, though,
it still serves us well.
I'd like to show you a few
screenshots in hopes that if any of
you watching are developers working
on a QuickTime webcasting app,
you take note of why it's so appealing.
Just look at this UI.
At a glance,
you can see that the status and flow of
video and audio data into encoded output.
It's almost pretty enough to
have been designed by Apple.
There are audio level
controls and view meters,
and there are video level
adjustments that can be made in
real time during a live webcast,
which are right there.
It shows an accurate preview in
a floating window of any of the
encoded outputs or the original
signal before and after preprocessing,
and you can switch that
view during a live webcast.
Broadcasting and recording can be
turned on and off independently,
and it can even record to disk the
DV stream that comes in over FireWire
in addition to the encoded outputs.
It can simultaneously encode multiple
separate Windows Media streams at
anything from 240x180 dial-up to 1Mbps,
480x360 full frame rate
versions for streaming over LAN.
It does this entirely in software
with video input over FireWire,
even on a laptop.
It also has PowerPoint integration.
It can load a PowerPoint presentation,
then generate PNG files of each slide,
FTP those up to a web server,
and build a web template for presenting
the video and slides side by side.
Then during the live webcast,
it monitors what slide a user is viewing
in a PowerPoint session on a remote PC,
and sends script-track commands
in the live stream to flip the
slides on viewers' screens.
Ironically,
it even works for viewers on Macs
using Windows Media Player for Mac.
Even its settings window
is a work of simplicity for
managing multiple live outputs.
It would seem to me that if Discrete,
with its limited resources
dedicated to this project,
could put this product
together almost two years ago,
Apple or one of its third-party
developers should be able to
leverage QuickTime and a G5
to do even better on the Mac.
For us, at least, this is really the last
piece of the puzzle.
As I understand,
we're supposed to wait until the
end for questions and answers,
so I'll turn it over now
to the next presenter.
Here we go.
Dave?
Well, thanks for coming out, everyone.
My name is Dave Schroeder.
I'm a Mac geek at the
University of Wisconsin.
That's a really fun job.
And what I'm going to talk
about today is—let's see here.
I'm going to talk about an IP video
delivery solution that we have recently
put together at the university.
We're currently in a pilot phase.
What we wanted to do was replace an
existing actual cable TV physical
plant infrastructure that we operated
for many years with something that
would deliver this over the network.
When we started off on this path,
we looked at a bunch of solutions
from many different vendors,
and we ended up settling on a solution
based on QuickTime technologies
and Apple hardware products.
So I'm going to talk a little bit
about the decisions that went into us
actually getting to this point and how
we actually put the system together.
And right now, like I say,
we're just in pilot.
We would like to expand what we talk
about here today and the exact hardware,
software, and techniques that we use
to put this thing together.
Um...
What we call our system
that we've built is the
Digital Academic Television Network,
or Dayton for short.
We are deploying this alongside a
new network that we're deploying on
the campus over the next few years.
And since these things go hand in hand,
it's interesting to look at a little
bit of the history of where we have
come over the past couple of decades,
what brought us to this point.
So the roots of Dayton are in our old
TV network that we operated called
the Academic Television Network,
or ATN.
And where this came from was
actually from an earlier predecessor
that was a computer network.
So in 1980, when I guess I was like
six or seven years old,
our organization's predecessor,
the Madison Academic Computing Center,
was operating a UNIVAC,
and people were starting to want remote
terminal access to this computer.
And when the university started
looking at ways to get remote
terminal access to people,
we realized that using copper
cables would actually fill up all
the conduit space available in
the building by many times over,
and we knew we had to
look at other solutions.
So we put together a broadband data
transmission system that is similar
to what is used for computer networks.
And we have a new technology for cable
television today called SciTech LocalNet.
And because it was so similar to,
you know, physically to what was required
to do video distribution,
it didn't take long for departments
on campus to start asking to be able
to deliver video over this system.
And we did just that.
And a couple years later,
we switched to Ethernet over this
broadband network using cable modems,
which are ancestors to the
modern cable modems that people
use today in their homes.
And then we jump ahead about a decade.
On the video side of things,
we knew that we needed to deploy
cable TV into our dormitories to
be able to have that be one of the
things that attracts students to live
in the university-operated housing.
So we actually embarked on a project
where we wired all of our dorms with
normal coaxial cable and called it
the Residential Television Network.
The original network that we operated
was the Academic Television Network.
And this was available to all the dorms,
and we contracted with the local cable
operator to provide all these channels,
all of the local cable channels,
non-premium channels to the dorms.
Now I should mention about the
Academic Television Network.
It is something that was used
for instructional content.
Departments were allowed to
put whatever they wanted on it.
So we gave channels to people
like the College of Engineering,
our School of Nursing,
and they'd maybe have a,
there was some experimentation with
doing courses over this network.
So people could go to remote locations
and actually attend a lecture or
watch pre-existing instructional
content that some departments would put
together and then loop on particular
channels or play at predefined times.
So really a lot of people had their
own channels that they could do
whatever they wanted to do with.
So we gave channels to people
like the College of Engineering,
our School of Nursing,
and they'd maybe have a,
there was some experimentation with
doing courses over this network.
So people could go to remote locations
and actually attend a lecture or
watch pre-existing instructional
content that some departments would put
together and then loop on particular
channels or play at predefined times.
whatever they wanted to do with.
When we did the RTN,
we asked our local cable operator,
which in our area is
Charter Communications,
formerly Bresnan, formerly TCI,
and now we're at Charter.
To allow us to put some selected channels
on the academic television network.
So we took channels like CNN,
Headline News, C-Span,
The Weather Channel,
and some foreign language channels
and things of that nature and put them
on the academic television network.
And this is important because this
represents the basis of what we're
able to do with Dayton today that
you'll hear about in a minute.
So a couple of years ago,
we started having trouble
maintaining the ATN.
It was tough to find replacements
for some of the equipment.
A lot of the equipment was becoming
obsolete or had been obsolete for years.
It was hard to find people
with actual cable TV and video
expertise to maintain the system,
and it was hard to find people
like that who wanted to crawl
around in steam tunnels to
repair the equipment as it broke.
So the next item there is
that the ATN was shut down.
That's not strictly true.
It was kind of shut down in phases
as things failed and until it
just stopped working completely.
And we knew we wanted to replace the
functionality of ATN with something else.
[Transcript missing]
So the reason why we started down
this path to build a new network
was because we realized that we
had exponential traffic growth,
but not exponential funding growth.
If we let the traffic grow—and
the University of Wisconsin has
always had a philosophy of we're
not going to limit traffic,
we're not going to limit what
people do with the network.
And so as things grew,
we had to find ways to pay for it,
and that was becoming
increasingly difficult.
And also another aspect
is that the University of
Wisconsin is a large campus.
This is the Madison campus.
We have almost 50,000 students.
We have tens of thousands of employees,
30 major departments and units,
and a lot of little departments,
and a whole bunch of different lands that
all have their own needs and desires and
ways that they want to run their network,
that sometimes don't cooperate
with how we want to centrally
administer the network.
So the solutions that we came to are
really eliminating a lot of the multiple
transports that we used to maintain,
like AppleTalk, IPX,
and everything—converging
everything to IP.
[Transcript missing]
We wanted to be able to show the campus
killer applications for why they would
want to move over to this network.
And we think that Dayton video delivery
over the network is one of them.
So when we decided to
start building Dayton,
we
[Transcript missing]
That kind of plays into the next
thing—flexible content delivery.
We want to be able to reach the
widest variety of clients possible.
We don't want to be tied into
clients or platforms that have just,
you know, whatever the particular player
that's required available.
We want to be able to
play to other things,
not just computers, too, possibly,
you know, set-top boxes and other
devices on the client end.
And cost was a concern for us.
Initially,
we have a relatively small pilot,
but we wanted to obviously
keep the cost down,
and the XServe that we use to do the
broadcasting is a lot less expensive
than some competitive products.
And one other thing
that we can do easily,
albeit with a little modification,
is multiple streams with a
single server—multiple different
streams with a single server
that isn't as easy as it is,
or sometimes even more difficult.
And then the software—well,
this was a no-brainer.
QuickTime Player,
free for Mac OS and Windows.
QuickTime Broadcaster, free.
QuickTime Streaming Server,
essentially free,
because we do all of our
streaming with XServes,
comes with OS X Server, which comes with
QuickTime Streaming Server.
[Transcript missing]
And then on the software side of things,
of course, OS X server, Broadcaster,
QuickTime streaming server,
and on the client end, of course,
QuickTime Player,
available on Mac OS and Windows,
but then open source players like VLC,
which people can use
on Mac OS and Windows,
but also other platforms.
Linux, BOS, Solaris,
pretty much anything you can think of,
or any MPEG-4 compliant device,
like MPEG-4,
like set-top boxes that might have the
capability to play back MPEG-4 content.
So someone might be able to have
this paired up with a television
set or a projector and doesn't
necessarily have to have strictly a
computer to view these broadcasts.
So here's a typical node for Dayton.
The head node is just kind of by itself,
and you can see it's a
picture of an XServe G5 there.
It will be a G5 soon.
It's currently a G4.
And then our streaming nodes.
We've got the cluster node itself,
and the tuner is connected
to video and audio to our
little AV firewire converter,
and then that's just connected by a
single firewire cable to the XServe.
And then we have this closed captioning
decoder that is connected by another
composite video cable to the Canopus,
and then via a serial
cable to the XServe.
So we actually use the serial port on
the XServe instead of for management.
We actually just use it
as a normal serial port.
We've disabled the console capability
in one of the configuration files
on OS X server and just let it
act as a straight serial port.
And then in some of the servers,
we've started experimenting also
with the Alchemy TV card from Miglia.
So without the Alchemy TV card,
we can do one channel with closed
captioning in 2U of rack space.
If we don't talk about closed captioning,
we've actually found that we can
do three simultaneous broadcasts
from one server in 1U of rack
space using these tuner cards.
Now in the XServe G5,
there's only two PCI slots,
and we're already doing that now.
So we're back down to two unless we
want to do something with firewire.
And we think that two is
probably a good number anyway.
So we're figuring on being able to
do two channels in 1U of rack space,
and we're already doing that now.
So, what does Dayton actually look like?
And so here's our pilot system right now.
You can see that we've got a
bunch of XSERV cluster nodes
and interspersed in between each
XSERV cluster node is our tuner.
And the reason why we've done that is
the tuners are really not that deep.
They're only a couple inches deep and
the XSERVs are however deep they are
and so that kind of leaves this little
shelf of space in between each XSERV that
we can stick the other equipment in.
So it ends up being a really nice
clean installation and really easy
to set up just with the management
capabilities of OS X Server and doing
things like cloning drives that are just,
you know, really straightforward on OS X.
All we really did was set up the system
on one cluster node of how we wanted
everything to be configured and then
we just kind of blasted that out to the
rest of the machines and we actually even
had all the servers running for a while.
It was net booted from the head node.
I didn't really see any advantage
of keeping doing just the net
booting since it was so easy,
since it was like just minutes to clone
a drive and pop it into a new machine
so then we could eliminate one other
kind of point of failure and this is it.
This is what our web
front end looks like.
We wanted people running whatever OS they
were running to be able to hit this site.
So this is actually our channels page,
and we just have all of our channel
logos of what we're carrying right now.
And now might be a good time to
stop here and talk for a second.
I've had a couple people ask me,
why are you doing TV channels?
Who cares if someone can
watch CBS on their desktop?
Especially if you're already
delivering cable TV to your dorms
and to university buildings using
just ordinary cable network.
Well,
this isn't just—we don't envision this
just being for doing cable TV channels.
We did cable TV channels first
because they were the easiest.
We already had an agreement
with our cable operator.
It was easy to get the content.
It's just content.
And it's something that
people can identify with.
People know TV,
and when they see it come up,
they're like, oh, yeah,
I know what it is.
And so we put them up in a
little window on their computer,
and when we explained to them that
these types of things that you're doing
now that seem relatively simple just
weren't possible on our network before.
We're a very large campus,
and we don't think that it would
have been practical or possible
to deploy something like this
to this number of people without
some of the new technologies
that the new network gives us.
Not only the higher
bandwidth that we get,
but doing everything
with the same technology.
So, as the previous presenter
was referring to,
this multicast capability is really key.
For those of you in here who might not be
familiar with what this multicast means,
what it essentially means is
when everyone—let's say someone
decides they want to view CNN,
and they click on the CNN logo,
and it comes up on their screen.
On a unicast network,
which is really just what
most networks ordinarily are,
they're going to be able to view CNN.
Every single person who clicks on CNN,
that's another stream
going out from the server.
It's more load on the server,
and it's more load on the
pipe leading to the server.
Every single additional
connection takes more bandwidth
and has more load on the server.
With multicast, there is one stream
coming out of the server.
And that signal has the capacity
to get anywhere on the network
that multicast is enabled.
Other computers out on the network,
out on network segments that
aren't viewing any broadcasts,
don't have to see the traffic.
But if you get one, two,
ten people viewing it in
a particular building,
it's all still just the one
signal that's going out.
So that's really critical because
it means that we can have limited
hardware on our end for delivery
and limited impact on the network
when people use a service like this.
So we want to add in
instructional content.
We want to put encoders at some of the
broadcast studios that we have on campus.
For example,
Wisconsin Public Television exists
on our campus.
Our School of Journalism and
Mass Communication would like
to put content on Dayton.
So really,
anyone who wants to become a part of
Dayton after we're out of the pilot
phase can get an encoder and can get
some kind of placement or representation
within Dayton and can then start
referring their customer base to
one central location for video content.
Here's our player.
A guy by the name of George Cook from
Apple helped us set this player up.
So this is a QuickTime skin that just has
All of the channels that we carry
right now over on the left-hand side,
you can click on them
and change the channel.
We have a special area up
here that could potentially
display customized information,
weather information, announcements,
what have you.
Then, of course, the video itself,
ways to turn on and
off closed captioning,
and our actual closed captioning content.
The way that the closed captioning
works is we have a script that
runs on each individual streaming
machine that captures each line of
closed captioning text as it comes
in from that text grabber box,
and then places it in an
XML file on the server.
The web server is turned on—Apache's
turned on—on each cluster node,
and this text track here knows
to query a particular text.
particular URL and check and see
if there's a new line of text.
If there is, display it.
If there's not, do nothing,
or if there's no text,
just have it black.
And people can--people have
the option to turn that off.
People have the option to go
full screen and eliminate all
this other stuff around it.
People have the option to even
view the closed captioning
content completely by itself.
And this is probably a good--a good time
to just briefly touch on what I mean
by the granularity is useful to us.
If this was some kind
of a turnkey solution,
we wouldn't be able to do something
that the school of journalism
came to us and asked which is,
"Hey, you're capturing--you have all
this closed caption content
associated with these channels.
What if we took all of
the closed captioning,
put it in a database, made it searchable,
and collected it for
weeks or months or years,
and took little thumbnail snapshots of
what it looks like and what it looks
like in the real world and then we could
use it to do whatever the video was
along with the closed captioning text,
say every 30 seconds or a minute,
just for reference,
and made this a searchable database
for our faculty and our students
so that people could do things like
maybe search all of the news channels
for particular terms that occurred,
how many times did this
occur in a particular period.
And it can become a very
valuable research tool and a
very valuable historical tool.
And I don't think that a turnkey solution
that might have provided us with this
would not have enabled us to do that.
So, we're going to try to do a demo and
if we could switch to--let's see,
let's see if
The demo machine, thank you.
And so here's what customers
see when they come in to
the Dayton site right now.
We give people a URL and
just tell them—you know,
we don't really tell them what they
need or anything like that first.
If someone's asking about Dayton,
we just say, okay, visit dayton.wisc.edu.
And you guys can visit this site, too,
because we have some other information
up here that talks about Dayton,
our history, the things we use,
and kind of just some of the
things that I've talked about
here and some pictures of Dayton.
So the first page, we just give people
some basic information,
review your system requirements,
verify that you're connected
to a multicast network.
And since we're tying this
with the 21st Century Network,
which is the thing that's actually
enabling multicast for most people,
we've gotten a lot of
requests lately for,
when are we going to get cut
over to the 21st Century Network?
Make sure that the
people have quick time,
and then we send people
either to— the channels page,
or
[Transcript missing]
So let's see if C-SPAN works.
What I've done here is we have a
unicast version of this one broadcast.
So there we go.
And obviously there's audio
along with it as well.
But this is what people see.
Now,
when you look at what our qualifications
were for this service is we wanted it
to be able to handle high speed motion,
so we do 30 frames per second.
It actually works for sporting
events and things like that.
And we wanted it to be able to
do—we wanted text to be visible.
But we wanted to do it at still
a reasonable enough quality where
relatively low end clients would
be able to connect to this thing.
We didn't want to blast everyone out of
the water and require some high end P4s
or G4s to be able to connect to this.
What's that?
Oh, yes.
So the video stream right
now is about 1.3 megabits,
and you'll see it spike
every once in a while,
but we've got it set at 1.3,
and then the audio is separate from that.
We can actually get higher qualities
if we go higher bandwidths,
and we think we're going to be able to
get really higher quality with H.264,
so we're really looking forward
to using the H.264 codec.
We can even get higher quality if we
use the third-party MPEG-4 codec from
a place called Thrivix at 3ivx.com.
Right now,
we're just using the Apple MPEG-4 codec.
So if we go full screen,
you'll be able to see that
it is a little bit grainy,
but like I said,
the priority was to be able to reach
the widest possible variety of clients
with the technology for encoding that
we had available to us right now.
Now, hopefully, there's closed captioning
along with this,
and you'll be able to see that, too.
Well, this is one of the times
where unfortunately the
demo guards aren't with me.
It doesn't look like there's closed
captioning along with it right now.
If there was,
you'd see the text scrolling
along on the bottom of the screen.
In fact, what I can do is—
Just see if I can bring up the closed
captioning from another channel.
So here's how it works.
Now, you're not going to be able
to—the video's not going to
load for this because this is
just a multicast-only channel.
There it is.
That's how the closed captioning works.
And on the info page for each channel,
we let people even load the closed
captioning by itself if they want to.
So people can pretty much take this and
do whatever they want to do with it.
They can even access the XML files
that has the raw text in it themselves.
So that is Dayton.
And if we go back to the slides,
I don't think there's
actually any slides left.
For more information,
you can visit our website
at dayton.wisc.edu.
And here's how to get in touch
with Nate and Dave Devereaux-Weber
is actually the manager of
this project at the university.
He couldn't make it with us today,
but that's my presentation.
Thank you.